Spec for Elevation QOL improvements (#8455)
microsoft/terminal: doc/specs/#5000 - Process Model 2.0/#1032 - Elevation Quality of Life Improvements.md

  elevated or not. ([#1939], [#8311])

## Background

_This section was originally authored in the [Process Model 2.0 Spec]. Please
refer to it there for its original context._

Let's presume that you're a user who wants to be able to open an elevated tab
within an otherwise unelevated Terminal window. We call this scenario "mixed
elevation" - the tabs within the Terminal can be running either unelevated _or_
elevated client applications.

It wouldn't be terribly difficult for the unelevated Terminal to request the
permission of the user to spawn an elevated client application. The user would
see a UAC prompt, they'd accept, and then they'd be able to have an elevated
shell alongside their unelevated tabs.

However, this creates an escalation of privilege vector. Now, there's an
unelevated window which is connected directly to an elevated process. At this
point, **any other unelevated application could send input to the Terminal's
`HWND`**. This would make it possible for another unelevated process to "drive"
the Terminal window, and send commands to the elevated client application.

It was initially theorized that the window/content model architecture would also

> help enable "mixed elevation"With mixed elevation, tabs could run at different

Reviewer: ```suggestion
help enable "mixed elevation." With mixed elevation, tabs could run at different

```

integrity levels within the same terminal window. However, after investigation
and research, it has become apparent that this scenario is not possible to do
safely after all. There are numerous technical difficulties involved, and each
with their own security risks. At the end of the day, the team wouldn't be
comfortable shipping a mixed-elevation solution, because there's simply no way
for us to be confident that we haven't introduced an escalation-of-privilege
vector utilizing the Terminal. No matter how small the attack surface might be,

> we wouldn't be confident that there are _no_ vectors for an attack.

Reviewer: Especially given our roadmap has us replacing the default story with the Terminal. And we don't want to be vulnerable by default. Individually choosing to be vulnerable... that's different.

    elevated window. However, then _we_ would need to be responsible for
    securing access the the RPC endpoint, and we feel even less confident doing
    that.
  - Attempts were also made to use a window-broker-content architecture, with
    the broker process having a static CLSID in the registry, and having the
    window and content processes at mixed elevation levels `CoCreateInstance`
    that broker. This however _also_ did not work across elevation levels. This
    may be due to a lack of Packaged COM support for mixed elevation levels.
    Even if this approach did end up working, we would still need to be
    responsible for securing the elevated windows so that an unelevated attacker
    couldn't hijack a content process and trigger unexepected code in the window
    process. We didn't feel confident that we could properly secure this channel
    either.

## Solution Design

Instead of supporting mixed elevation in the same window, we'll introduce the
following features to the Terminal. These are meant as a way of improving the
quality of life for users who work in mixed-elevation (or even just elevated)

> environments.

Reviewer 2: making ctrl+shift+mouse click a key binding to launch elevated would be good too

Author: Could you be more specific? What exactly would the user be clicking on in this scenario? The Taskbar? The jumplist? The new profile dropdown? Something else...?

Reviewer 2: sorry for that. The user will be clicking on the profile entry in the New profile drop-down. Like on windows if you hold ctrl+shift and open any app. On the start menu/Taskbar it will launch elevated

Author: Okay that makes sense, this is a good idea, thanks!

existing window at that elevation level, or possibly create its own window.

Similarly, for a new elevated window, we can make sure to pass the `-s -1` arguments
to `wt`. These parameters indicate that we definitely want this command to run in a
new window, regardless of the current glomming settings.

```
wt -s -1 new-tab [args...]
```

However, creating a new **split pane** is a little trickier. Invoking the `wt
split-pane [args...]` is straightforward enough.

⚠ **TODO**: For discussion:

If the current window doesn't have the same elevation level as the
requested profile, do we always want to just create a new split? If the command
ends up glomming to an existing window, does that even make sense? That invoking
an elevated split in an unelevated window would end up splitting the elevated
window? It's very possible that the user wanted a split in the tab they're
currently in, in the unelevated window, but they don't want a split in the
elevated window.

What if there's not space in the elevated window to create the split (but there
would be in the current window)? That would sure make it seem like nothing
happened, silently.

> We could alternatively have cross-elevation splits default to always opening a

Reviewer: > mitigate some of the odd
Indeed.

I like the "don't split things cross elevation; do a new tab instead". Splitting is weird when the context switches. Either new tab implicitly or a warning that what you requested couldn't be completed as non-sense do you want to:
A. Make me a new tab instead.
B. Forget it and cancel. I'll go fix my config.

That would be my best idea, at least.

Author: (I've added this suggestion, but I'm still leaning towards "open a new tab always")

#### `elevated` in Actions

Additionally, we'll add the `elevated` property to the `NewTerminalArgs` used in
the `newTab`, `splitPane`, and `newWindow` actions. This is similar to how other
properties of profiles can be overriden at launch time. This will allow windows,
tabs and panes to all be created specifically as elevated windows.

We'll also add an iterable command for opening a profile in an
elevated tab, with the following json:

```jsonc
{
    // New elevated tab...
    "name": { "key": "NewElevatedTabParentCommandName", "icon": "UAC-Shield.png" },
    "commands": [
        {
            "iterateOn": "profiles",
            "icon": "${profile.icon}",
            "name": "${profile.name}",
            "command": { "action": "newTab", "profile": "${profile.name}", "elevated": true }
        }
    ]
},
```

## Implementation Details

### Starting an elevated process from an unelevated process

It seems that we're able to create an elevated process by passing the `"runas"`
verb to
[`ShellExecute`](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/shellapi/nf-shellapi-shellexecutea).
So we could use something like

```c++

> ShellExecute(nullptr,

Reviewer: What will be the OneCore behavior here? We'll have to likely cross that bridge one day.

Author: Oh that's a good question. I haven't the faintest clue how you elevate on OneCore, but I'm _sure_ there aren't any docs on that. Are there different users on OneCore? Different integrity levels?

Author: (I've added a section in "Potential issues")

             L"runas",
             L"wt.exe",
             L"-s -1 new-tab [args...]",
             nullptr,
             SW_SHOWNORMAL);
```

This will ask the shell to perform a UAC prompt before spawning `wt.exe` as an
elevated process.

### Starting an unelevated process from an elevated process

As always, there's a blog post by Raymond Chen that describes in detail how we
could go about launching a process _unelevated_ when we're currently elevated.
For more details, please refer to [The Old New Thing: How can I launch an
unelevated process from my elevated process, redux].

## Potential Issues

<table>
<tr>

> <td><strong>Accessibility</strong></td>

Reviewer: OMG did this table make it into the template... because if it didn't... it should.

Author: Not yet, but I'm hoping to update the template to re-organize some of the things, rename headers, etc. I'll merge this version of the table in for sure when I do that ☺️

Unfortunately, these issues are OS bugs that are largely out of our own control.
We will continue to apply pressure to the centennial app team internally as we
encounter these issues. They are are team best equipped to resolve these issues.

### Default Terminal & auto-elevation

In the future, when we supporting setting the Terminal as the "default terminal
emulator" on Windows. When that lands, we will use the `profiles.defaults`
settings to create the tab we'll hosting the commandline client. If the user has
`"elevated": true` in their `profiles.defaults`, we'd usually try to
auto-elevate the profile. In this scenario, however, we can't do that. The
Terminal is being invoked on behalf of the client app launching, instead of the
Terminal invoking the client application.

## Future considerations

* If we wanted to go even further down the visual differentiation route, we
  could consider allowing the user to set an entirely different theme ([#3327])
  based on the elevation state. Something like `elevatedTheme`, to pick another
  theme from the set of themes. This would allow them to force elevated windows
  to have a red titlebar, for example.

## Resources

<!-- Footnotes -->

> [#1939]: https://github.com/microsoft/terminal/issues/1939

Reviewer: Somehow none of these show up in the visual document view at https://github.com/microsoft/terminal/blob/dev/migrie/s/1032-elevation-qol/doc/specs/%235000%20-%20Process%20Model%202.0/%231032%20-%20Elevation%20Quality%20of%20Life%20Improvements.md

Author: They aren't supposed to - they just let you put `[#number]` in the markdown and have it get linked up. Otherwise you'd have to put the full URL each time. Usually there are other docs, pages that I put in this section for "citations" essentially, but I didn't do that for this doc apparently.

Reviewer: Oh. OK.

In the `NewTerminalArgs`, `elevate` will be an optional boolean, with the
following behavior:
* `null` (_default_): Don't modify the `elevate` property for this profile
* `true`: This launch should act like the profile had `"elevate": true` in its
  properties.
* `false`: This launch should act like the profile had `"elevate": false` in its
  properties.

We'll also add an iterable command for opening a profile in an
elevated tab, with the following json:

```jsonc
{
    // New elevated tab...
    "name": { "key": "NewElevatedTabParentCommandName", "icon": "UAC-Shield.png" },
    "commands": [
        {
            "iterateOn": "profiles",
            "icon": "${profile.icon}",
            "name": "${profile.name}",
            "command": { "action": "newTab", "profile": "${profile.name}", "elevated": true }
        }
    ]
},
```

#### Elevation from the dropdown

Currently, the new tab dropdown supports opening a new pane by
<kbd>Alt+click</kbd>ing on a profile. We could similarly add support to open a
tab elevated with <kbd>Ctrl+click</kbd>. This is similar to the behavior of the
Windows taskbar. It supports creating an elevated instance of a program by

> <kbd>Ctrl+click</kbd>ing on entries as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<kbd>Ctrl+Shift+click</kbd>ing on entries as well.

```

Reviewer 2: oh, that actually sounds great! :shipit:

_figure 1: a monochrome UAC shield in the titlebar of the window, courtesy of @mdtauk_

### Change profile appearance for elevated windows

In [#3062] and [#8345], we're planning on allowing users to set different
appearances for a profile whether it's focused or not. We could do similar thing
to enable a profile to have a different appearance when elevated. In the
simplest case, this could allow the user to set `"background": "#ff0000"`. This
would make a profile always appear to have a red background when in an elevated
window.

The more specific details of this implementation are left to the spec
[Configuration object for profiles].

### Configuring a profile to always run elevated

Oftentimes, users might have a particular tool chain that only works when
running elevated. In these scenarios, it would be convenient for the user to be
able to identify that the profile should _always_ run elevated. That way, they
could open the profile from the dropdown menu of an otherwise unelevated window
and have the elevated window open with the profile automatically.

We'll be adding the `"elevate": true|false` setting as a per-profile setting,

> with a default value of `false`. When set to `true`, we'll try to auto-elevate

Reviewer 3: Should we maybe display the actual `command` before auto-elevate the profile? Malicious software could possibly modify the elevated profiles and perform some kind of injection. Users will not notice the difference if the profile is auto-elevated, and naturally say "yes" to some malwares unconsciously.

Author: I believe UAC will do that already, though, it's in the "show details". I suppose we'll only be showing the profile... I guess that means someone could edit the settings so the profile was `"commandline": "malicious.exe"`, and there's nothing preventing them from doing that. That's not good. Yea there should probably be another internal warning.

This also marks a departure from the current behavior, where everything in an
elevated window would be elevated by default. The user would need to specify for
each thing in the elevated window that they'd want to create it elevated. Or the
Terminal would need to provide some setting like
`"autoElevateEverythingInAnElevatedWindow"`.

We cannot support mixed elevation when starting in a unelevated window.
Therefore, it doesn't make a lot of UX sense to support it in the other
direction. It's a cleaner UX story to just have everything in a single window at
the same elevation level.

## Solution Design

Instead of supporting mixed elevation in the same window, we'll introduce the
following features to the Terminal. These are meant as a way of improving the
quality of life for users who work in mixed-elevation (or even just elevated)
environments.

### Visible indicator for elevated windows

As requested in [#1939], it would be nice if it was easy to visibly identify if
a Terminal window was elevated or not.

One easy way of doing this is by adding a simple UAC shield to the left of the
tabs for elevated windows. This shield could be configured by the theme (see

> [#3327]). We could provide the following states:

Author: Correct. This icon's only in the top-left of the entire _window_, not the tab.

> * Colored (the default)

Author: I mean, yea, sure, we could do that if someone really wanted that

* Monochrome
* Hidden, to hide the shield even on elevated windows. This is the current
  behavior.

> ![UAC-shield-in-titlebar](UAC-shield-in-titlebar.png)

Reviewer 4: Having multiple monarchs (one for elevated, one for unelevated) means multiple tray icons; we may want an elevated terminal tray icon that's different from the baseline one, too. _maybe_

with a default value of `false`. When set to `true`, we'll try to auto-elevate
the profile whenever it's launched. We'll check to see if this window is
elevated before creating the connection for this profile. If the window is not
elevated, then we'll create a new window with the requested elevation level to
handle the new connection.

`"elevate": false` will do nothing. If the window is already elevated, then the
profile won't open an un-elevated window.

If the user tries to open an `"elevated": true` profile in a window that's
already elevated, then a new tab/split will open in the existing window, rather
than spawning an additional elevated window.

There are three situations where we're creating new terminal instances: new
tabs, new splits, and new windows. Currently, these are all actions that are
also exposed in the `wt` commandline as subcommands. We can convert from the
commandline arguments into these actions already. Therefore, it shouldn't be too
challenging to convert these actions back into the equal commandline arguments.

For the following examples, let's assume the user is currently in an unelevated
Terminal window.

> When the user tries to create a new elevated **tab**, we'll need to create a new

Author: That's maybe a good tangent to the `split-pane` discussion. With that discussion, I'm more concerned about someone trying to `splitPane` with a keybinding in an unelevated window, a Profile that's `elevate=true`. That's where it's a little weird. 

`wt --admin [args...]` would be interpreted as basically "if I'm not elevated, launch an elevated `wt [args...]`". `wt -w X --admin [args...]` would then run `[args...]` in the elevated `X` window

Details" dropdown to reveal them.

We will need to mitigate this vulnerability regardless of adding support for the
auto-elevation of individual terminal tabs/panes. If a user is launching the
Terminal elevated (i.e. from the Win+X menu in Windows 11), then it's possible
for a malicious program to overwrite the `commandline` of their default profile.
The user may now unknowingly invoke this malicious program while thinking they
are simply launching the Terminal.

To deal with this more broadly, we will display a dialog within the Terminal
window before creating **any** elevated terminal instance. In that dialog, we'll
display the commandline that will be executed, so the user can very easily
confirm the commandline.

This will need to happen for all elevated terminal instances. For an elevated
Windows Terminal window, this means _all_ connections made by the Terminal.
Every time the user opens a new profile or a new commandline in a pane, we'll
need to prompt them first to confirm the commandline. This dialog within the
elevated window will also prevent an attacker from editing the `settings.json`
file while the user already has an elevated Terminal window open and hijacking a

> profile.

Reviewer 5: Could we only do this once per settings.json change?

Particularly, I'm envisioning a process like this:
(0) `settings.json`-->`Custom` Profile: `"commandline": "foo.exe"`
(1) Open WT elevated --> `Custom` profile opens
(2) <we get that dialog you're proposing>
(3) open a new tab with `Custom` profile
(4) <new tab just opens; no dialog>
(5) make _any_ change to `settings.json` (via SUI or directly)
(6) open a new tab with `Custom` profile
(7) <we get that dialog you're proposing>

(Devil's advocate to my proposal) Would this idea fall apart if somebody made a change to `foo.exe`? Or if `foo.exe` was replaced with `pwsh.exe bar.ps1` and `bar.ps1` was updated? Would we have to check all of those for changes?

Reviewer 5: Oh wait... this might be what you say a few lines below...

The dialog options will certainly be annoying to users who don't want to be
taken out of their flow to confirm the commandline that they wish to launch.
There's precedent for a similar warning being implemented by VSCode, with their
[Workspace Trust] feature. They too faced a similar backlash when the feature
first shipped. However, in light of recent global cybersecurity attacks, this is
seen as an acceptable UX degradation in the name of application trust. We don't
want to provide an avenue that's too easy to abuse.

When the user confirms the commandline of this profile as something safe to run,
we'll add it to an elevated-only version of `state.json`. (see [#7972] for more
details). This elevated version of the file will only be accessible by the
elevated Terminal, so an attacker cannot hijack the contents of the file. This
will help mitigate the UX discomfort caused by prompting on every commandline

> launched. This should mean that the discomfort is only

Reviewer 4: "is only" ?

The dialog for confirming these commandlines should have a link to the docs for

> "why do I need to do this?". Transparency in the face of this dialog should

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
"Learn more...". Transparency in the face of this dialog should
```
nit: I believe that's what VS Code does.

mitigate some dissatisfaction.

The dialog will _not_ appear if the user does not have a split token - if the
user's PC does not have UAC enabled, then they're _already_ running as an
Administrator. Everything they do is elevated, so they shouldn't be prompted in
this way.

The Settings UI should also expose a way of viewing and removing these cached
entries. This page should only be populated in the elevated version of the
Terminal.

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><strong>Reliability</strong></td>
<td>

No changes to our reliability are expected as a part of this change.

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><strong>Compatibility</strong></td>
<td>

There are no serious compatibility concerns expected with this changelist. The

> new `elevated` property will be unset by default, so users will heed to opt-in

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
new `elevate` property will be unset by default, so users will heed to opt-in
```

infrastructure and running the Terminal elevated. Notably, we've had to list all
our WinRT classes in our SxS manifest so they could be activated using
unpackaged WinRT while running elevated. Additionally, there are plenty of
issues running the Terminal in an "over the shoulder" elevation (OTS) scenario.

Specifically, we're concerned with the following scenario:
  * the current user account has the Terminal installed,
  * but they aren't an Administrator,
  * the Administrator account doesn't have the Terminal installed.

In that scenario, the user can run into issues launching the Terminal in an
elevated context (even after entering the Admin's credentials in the UAC
prompt).

This spec proposes no new mitigations for dealing with these issues. It may in
fact make them more prevalent, by making elevated contexts more easily
accessible.

Unfortunately, these issues are OS bugs that are largely out of our own control.
We will continue to apply pressure to the centennial app team internally as we
encounter these issues. They are are team best equipped to resolve these issues.

### Default Terminal & auto-elevation

> In the future, when we supporting setting the Terminal as the "default terminal

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In the future, when we support setting the Terminal as the "default terminal
```

emulator" on Windows. When that lands, we will use the `profiles.defaults`

> settings to create the tab we'll hosting the commandline client. If the user has

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
settings to create the tab where we'll be hosting the commandline client. If the user has
```

does become available on those SKUs, we can use these proposals as mitigations.

* If elevation is supported, there must be some other way of elevating a
  process. We could always use that mechanism instead.
* If elevation isn't supported (I'm thinking 10X is one of these), then we could
  instead display a warning dialog whenever a user tries to open an elevated
  profile.
  - We could take the warning a step further. We could add another settings
    validation step. This would warn the user if they try to mark any profiles
    or actions as `"elevate":true`

## Future considerations

* If we wanted to go even further down the visual differentiation route, we
  could consider allowing the user to set an entirely different theme ([#3327])
  based on the elevation state. Something like `elevatedTheme`, to pick another
  theme from the set of themes. This would allow them to force elevated windows
  to have a red titlebar, for example.
* Over the course of discussion concerning appearance objects ([#8345]), it
  became clear that having separate "elevated" appearances defined for
  `profile`s was overly complicated. This is left as a consideration for a

>   possible future extension that could handle this scenario in a cleaner way.

Reviewer 5: Can we have an issue to track the discussion on "elevated" vs "unfocused" appearance configs?

I'm wondering if we could just do the following:
|  | Focused | Unfocused |
|--|--|--|
| Regular | regular settings | `unfocusedAppearance` |
| Elevated | `elevatedAppearance` | `elevatedAppearance` |

Reasoning: "elevated" is a long-term state whereas focus constantly shifts

idk, either way, a thread on this might be nice to have.

Author: I mean, we might as well just use #1939 for that, yea?

* Similarly, we're going to leave [#3637] "different profiles when elevated vs
  unelevated" for the future. This also plays into the design of "configure the
  new tab dropdown" ([#1571]), and reconciling those two designs is out-of-scope

>   for this particular release.

Reviewer 5: _Crazy idea_: `admin-settings.json`?

Author: Honestly I'm just thinking `newTabDropdown` and `adminNewTabDropdown`, if you really want them to be different
